---
title: "RBF-FD based dynamic thermal rating of overhead power lines"
authors: "G. Kosec, J. Slak"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2018-07-12-afm
talk: 2018-07-12-afm
excerpt: 'This paper talks about doing dynamic thermal rating of power lines
by computing the thermo-fluid flow around a cyllinder coupled with
the heat equation in the interior'
date: 2018-07-12
journal: 'Advances in Fluid Mechanics XII, WIT Transactions on Engineering Sciences vol. 120, Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Fluid Mechanics, AFM 18, July 10–12, 2018, Ljubljana, Slovenia'
localfile: 'papers/CP_2018_KosecSlak_AFM.pdf'
bibtex: 'papers/CP_2018_KosecSlak_AFM.bib'
doi: '10.2495/AFM180261'
citation: 'G. Kosec and J. Slak, RBR-FD based dynamic thermal rating of overhead power lines, in: Advances in fluid mechanics XII, Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Fluid Mechanics, AFM 18, July 10–12, 2018, Ljubljana, Slovenia (eds. S. Hernández, L. Škerget and J. Ravnik), WIT transactions on engineering sciences 120, Wessex institute, WIT press, 2018, pp. 255–262, doi:10.2495/afm180261.'
---

## Abstract

The essential limiting factor of the power transmission line transfer capabilities is the
maximal allowed temperature of the conductor that should not be exceeded to avoid
excessive sags. A commonly used conservative approach is to limit transfer capability to
the worst case scenarios, i.e. hot, sunny, windless days. Of course, system operators strive
to raise the limit with more sophisticated models that take into account actual weather
conditions or even weather forecasts. As a consequence, there has been substantial research
done on Dynamic Thermal Rating (DTR) models in the last few decades. Based on
accumulated knowledge the leading standards in the field published guidelines for thermal
rating for operative use. However, the proposed models rely only on empirical relations for
determination of the temperature gradient on the surface of the conductor that dictates the
heat flux due to the advection. This heat flux is the most intense cooling mechanism in
play, and also the most complex to model. In this paper, we extend the discussion about
advective cooling with a direct simulation of temperature and velocity fields near the
conductor with the focus on the natural convection regime. The introduced model considers
Joule heat generation and heat transport within the power line and its vicinity, fluid flow
driven by buoyancy force, solar heating, and radiation. The solution procedure uses RBF-
FD numerical method combined with Poisson disk sampling nodal positioning algorithm.
The results of the simulation are presented in terms of temperature and velocity magnitude
contour plots, convergence analyses, and comparison of convective heat losses of simulated
results to IEC, IEEE and CIGRE standards.
