---
title: "Adaptive RBF-FD method"
authors: "Jure Slak"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-09-24-phd
excerpt: 'We develop h-adaptivity for elliptic problems using RBF-FD meshless method.'
date: 2020-09-24
journal: 'Journal of Scientific Computing'
localfile: 'phd.pdf'
bibtex: 'papers/phd.bib'
officialurl: 'https://repozitorij.uni-lj.si/IzpisGradiva.php?id=121511'
doi: '10.1007/s10915-020-01401-y'
citation: 'Slak, J. (2020). Adaptive RBF-FD method (Doctoral dissertation, Univerza v Ljubljani, Fakulteta za matematiko in fiziko).'
---

## Abstract

Radial-basis-function-generated finite differences (RBF-FD) is a method for solving par-
tial differential equations (PDEs), which is developed into a fully automatic adaptive me-
thod during the course of this work. RBF-FD is a strong form meshless method, which
means that it does not require a mesh of the problem domain, but uses only a set of nodes
as the basis for the discretization. A large part of this PhD is dedicated to algorithms for
meshless node generation. A new algorithm for construction of variable density mesh-
less discretizations in arbitrary spatial dimensions is developed. It can generate points
in the interior and on the boundary, has provable minimal spacing requirements, can
generate N points in O(N log N ) time and the resulting node sets are compatible with
RBF-FD. This algorithm is used as the basis of a newly proposed h-adaptive procedure
for elliptic problems. The behavior of the procedure is analyzed on classical 2D and 3D
adaptive Poisson problems. Furthermore, several contact problems from linear elastic-
ity are solved, demonstrating successful adaptive derefinement and refinement, with the
densest parts of the discretization being more than a million times denser than the coars-
est. Finally, the software developed for this work and broader research is presented and
published online as an open source library for solving PDEs with strong form methods.

